Add a blog post comparing the tasking systems (#368)
pulp/pulpproject.org: _posts/2021-06-21-a-new-tale.md

---
title: A new Tale - Pulp gets queueless distributed task workers
author: Matthias Dellweg
tags:
  - tasking
  - performance
  - high availability
  - scalability
---

> Pulp is about to introduce a new replacement for its tasking system.

Reviewer: If we can introduce bullets somehow it would make this more readable.

> This complete redesign comes with a much simpler architecture, that will drop the need for the resource-manager, the last singleton in the Pulp 3 infrastructure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This complete redesign comes with a much simpler architecture, that will drop the need for the resource-manager, the last singleton in the Pulp 3 infrastructure.
```

Can you explain to me what you mean by singleton?

Author: A singleton is a type of thing where there can only ever be one instance of at a given time.
With Pulp, we can have multiple api-servers, multiple content-servers and multiple workers. All of those to share the load. Even the database may be installed with distributed server processes and a redundant clustered filesystem. But the (single) resource-manager is the point where all tasks must pass by before being delivered to the workers. If it dies, another one must be started to take up the work (in the best case a hot spare).

Reviewer 2: I just googled and this is in fact a term in software. 
This is the first time I heard of it, so TIL something new, thank you! 
A singleton is usually a single person in regular English ;)
I will resolve this comment.

> This complete redesign comes with a much simpler architecture, that will drop the need for the resource-manager, the last singleton in the Pulp 3 infrastructure.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This complete redesign comes with a much simpler architecture that will drop the need for the resource-manager, the last singleton in the Pulp 3 infrastructure.
```

Additionally, the distributed nature of the new task worker type drops the use of `Redis Queue` (`rq`).
With this simplification there is no longer a need to replicate task data accross two databases.
The main Postgres Pulp database will therefore be the single source of truth about tasks.
Last but not least, the new worker type will use Postgres advisory locks to ensure exclusive access to tasks.

> This is a much more lightweigt approach than storing access locks in a separate table.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is a much more lightweight approach than storing access locks in a separate table.
```

Also it simplifies the cleanup process vastly if a worker dies as postgres will clean the locks with its connection.

With all these simplifications, the new tasking system is more reliable.
Without the resource-manager as the single point of failure, it will be fully high available.

> Also with the resource-manager seen as the choke point in task processing, the new distributed system will scale much better in performance with the number of parallel running workers.

Reviewer: Also can all lines be wrapped to 100 chars please

> Also with the latter seen as the choke point in task processing, we see, that the new distributed system will scale much better in performance with the number of parallel running workers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Also with the resource-manager seen as the choke point in task processing, the new distributed system will scale much better in performance with the number of parallel running workers.
```

> > ![Tasking system benchmark](/images/tasking_system_benchmark/scale_workers.png) <br/>

Reviewer: This image doesn't show up for me.

Author: Same here, but i tried to follow the examples in `git grep "/images"`:
```
...
_posts/2020-11-25-pulp-community-survey-results-2020.md:![Interested in contributing to Pulp?](/images/communitysurvey/2020/interest-in-contributing.png)
```

Reviewer 2: Strange, this worked here: https://github.com/pulp/pulpproject.org/pull/317/files#diff-4ebb213dffb16eafe554603b7b4b80a837e9e65e47deeb23e68562e63be0ea4dR56 also

Author: @mcorr do you _know_ what's the right approach here?

Reviewer 2: I'll take a look now @mdellweg !

Reviewer 2: Serving this locally and it is working for me @mdellweg

>   Benchmark of the old and new tasking system with a single thread bursting 256 tasks that need random 2 out of a pool of 128 abstract resources and need 0.5 s to complete.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  This image shows the benchmark of the old and new tasking system with a single thread bursting 256 tasks that need a random 2 out of a pool of 128 abstract resources and need 0.5 s to complete.
```

>   Plotted is in the first panel the average time the foreground thread needs per task, and in the second the average time, a task needs from being available in the system and being picked up by a worker.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  In the first panel, the average time the foreground thread needs per task is plotted, and in the second, the average time a task needs from being available in the system to when it's picked up by a worker.
```

>   It can be seen, that in the old system, the `resource-manager` is able to deliver about 2 tasks per second, and that providing more than two workers do not provide additional speedup.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  It can be seen in the old system that the `resource-manager` is able to deliver about 2 tasks per second, and that providing more than two workers does not provide additional speedup.
```

>   In the new tasking system however the tasks throughput scales well with the number of  workers provided.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  In the new tasking system however the task throughput scales up with the number of workers provided.
```

  However starting with 32 workers, the database load of concurrent processes polling the tasks table will slow down the insertion of new tasks into the system by a factor of about 5.

The removal of the queueing system brings another nontrivial benefit to the table.

> As no tasks are assigned to a worker anymore before actually starting to be performed, there will be no tasks canceled that were already pending in the corresponding queue on a worker restart.

Reviewer 3: This is wordy. Can it be simplified?

```suggestion
Tasks are no longer assigned to workers before actually starting, and therefore no tasks will be canceled that are already pending in the task queue on a worker restart.
```

This new system will be introduced in the upcoming 3.14 release of Pulpcore as a drop in replacement.
With the current plan, it will be switched off by default.

> To activate the new system, you need to set the `USE_NEW_WORKER_TYPE` setting to `True`, and restart your Pulp services.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To activate the new system, you need to set the `USE_NEW_WORKER_TYPE` setting to `True` and restart your Pulp services.
```

> For production environments, we recommend however, that you first drain your taskqueues, by shutting down the api-workers first.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For production environments, however, we recommend that you first drain your task queues by shutting down the api-workers first.
```

If you decide to go back, it is basically the same process, where you flip the setting to `False`.
While this process introduces a downtime on the api side, the content delivery side is not affected by this change.

> The current plan is to mark the new system as default one minor Pulpcore release later, and deprecate the old system, to be removed yet another minor release after that.

Reviewer 2: do we have which version this begins with?

Author: It's "one after" the aforementioned 3.14.

A note for integrators:

>   While this infers that Redis can eventually be dropped from the architecture, it is likely to be reintroduced again soon for caching access to the content delivery side.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  While this infers that Redis can eventually be dropped from the architecture, it is likely to be reintroduced again soon for caching access on the content delivery side.
```

>   While this infers that Redis can eventually be dropped from the architecture, it is likely to be reintroduced again soon for caching access on the content delivery side.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  While this infers that Redis can eventually be dropped from Pulp's architecture, it is likely to be reintroduced again soon for caching access on the content delivery side.
```
